You But at that time he couldn't have George Powell died from him. However, I
understand that somebody else is now contemplating making one. In fact they're
working on treatment right now. I wonder if it will have Bo Derek in it like the
new Tarzan movie is going to have. Well, only if the Tarzan movie ever comes
out. Yeah, again as David said, we'll want to keep it real informal. and what
we're shooting for in our national form started. Tapes rolling. Tapes rolling.
Mr. Farmer, how did you get started writing science fiction? Well, I started
reading science fiction when I was seven years old. I'm 63 now. And I knew I
always wanted to be a writer, although I didn't do much about it for many years.
the funny thing is i actually intended to become a mainstream writer that is to
write stories which are not in particular genre but i somehow or other just
drifted into science fiction and sold my first science fiction story in 1952
that was called the lovers it was a novelette which was published in a magazine
and it's generally credited with breaking the and taboo against the mature use
of sex in a science fiction magazine.
And I've been writing since 1952, but I always held a job down up until 1969. I
was a tech writer for the McDonnell Douglas company working for the space
industry out in Los Angeles when a month before the first moon landing, they
laid off the thousands and thousands of workers in the space defense industry.
You may recall that. And like all the rest, I was out of a job, but I'd been
writing all those years, weekends and evenings, had a pretty good backlog and
built up something of a reputation by then, so I decided to freelance. Then I
found a job. would have done a very good job with the civilian outfit but I said
to heck with it became a freelancer and have been so since about June 1969
you mentioned that The Lovers was your first work and you did many it was my
first science fiction work I sold the story to Adventure Magazine 1945 I think
You mentioned that it was known for breaking the taboos. Did you consciously set
out to write such a story or is that just how it developed? No, I had an idea
for a story… I couldn't write it unless I broke the taboos. I didn't really
consciously set out to do it because I had the idea and I thought it was
terrific, on the other hand I knew I was going to have a lot of trouble getting
it accepted, and I did. I did have a lot of trouble. The first editor I sent it
to, John Campbell, who was the editor of Astounding, was the most prestigious
and the highest paying market. So naturally, I sent it to him first. And he
returned it with a comment that nauseated him. So I sent it to Horace Gold, who
was editing Galaxy, which was equally prestigious and had about the same word
rates. His comments were something like John Campbell's. Then I sent it to
Samuel Minds, who was editor of a magazine called Startling Stories. And he
immediately accepted it and knew it was a revolutionary breakthrough. I
published it, and I was on my way. Except that the next story I wrote was also
equally revolutionary, and it took me a year before I could get anybody to
accept it. A lot of your other stories in that time opened to me. My sister and
Flesh and mother come to mind as stories in the same vein.
Bill, could you talk a little louder? Yes, I can. Okay. You've also written a
number of pieces that revolve around a religious theme. The first story, The
Lovers, and then the book that just came out, Father to the Stars, the stories
of Father John Carmody which have finally been collected, A Woman a Day, Jesus
on Mars. Do you have strong feelings about religion one way or the other to
include it in your work so much? Well, I must. I was sent to Sunday school when
I was very little and I became interested in the Bible and i read it on my own
and i even read the book of mormons i was about nine years old and uh always
wrestled all my life with the problems of immortality predestination grace the
afterlife and all that sort of stuff i was raised as a christian scientist up
until the time i was about 12 and then i was sent to a presbyterian church where
there was a conflict between Christian science and the Presbyterian idea of
predestination. And then when I was about 16, I guess I became an atheist. I'd
gone through atheism, through agnosticism, and then I was converted to the
disciples of Christ. then i backslid fell from grace as the theological term
goes and then i lapsed back into agnosticism my present uh situation is that uh
without immortality life has no meaning and if there's a creation there must be
a creator but i've become tremendously interested in and what is sometimes
referred to as mythicism, and it isn't really, like, the Muslims in the Muslim
-Sufism school,
than a lot of related stuff like that. You might say right now I'm in sort of a
limbo, heading towards something I don't know what. But anyway, my interest in
religion has manifested itself throughout all my work. although a lot of people,
when they say the name farmer, immediately think of sex in a book. The fact is
I've written much more about religion than about sex. Or sometimes both at the
same time. In some respects, sex and religion are two sides of the same coin in
certain fields of activity. Father John. You're coming through clear? You're
doing fine, yeah. Okay, I'll do another question now. Father John Carmody seems
to be making a comeback. Will there be more stories of him appearing pretty
soon? There will be, but not soon because I've got so many contracts and so many
ideas for other stories. It'll be a couple of years before I get around to it.
See, when I wrote the last Father John Carmody story about the Roman Catholic
interstellar priest, Uh, that must have been at least 15 years ago. And I left
the poor guy up and up, hanging up in the middle of space with an egg growing
from his chest. I always wanted to bring him down and write about three more
stories and finish up that series. One thing is, by actual counts, I started 15
series and never really finished any of them. So it depends on how long I live
whether I finish it or not. You mentioned while ago that the afterlife has a bit
of interest for you. Inside, outside, and of course the River World books come
to mind here. Are these related in any way?
You mean, are they related in that they're
in the same universe? Or you took the idea, the afterlife idea and it diverged
and went the two different ways. Yeah, that's what I've done. I've varied the
idea, or done variations on the same theme, you might say, as far as afterlife
goes. If you think about it, there could be a million different possibilities in
an afterlife if there were. but one of my perhaps unstated themes is that
immortality may not depend upon a supernatural being that's in the evolutionary
drive of man for him to invent immortality himself. The drawback to that is
those people who are already dead will remain dead, right? so that doesn't
correspond to the religious idea of immortality where everybody is raised from
the first human being to the last one. I like to do a lot of variations on that.
I have a new book coming out from Putnam in September called The Unreasoning
Mask. That's a quotation from Moby Dick. This is concerned with theology,
afterlife, immortality, you might call it a philosophical, theological space
opera.
I don't suppose they'll ever really abandon that theme, but then again, that's
just one of the many themes that I have in the work. One of the reasons I've had
trouble in the early days, I think, really becoming identified and getting a
band of followers is that I didn't beat on just one or two drums. I ranged all
over the field. I've written a lot of what I would call venture science fiction,
in addition to experimental science fiction, theological, philosophical, sexual,
biological, you name it. What I find out is if I do a variety of stuff, they
don't get tired. each new novel is a new challenge. I'm not just working the
same old theme again.
Will you continue to do some River World stories? I know the novels are
finished, but what about the stories? Well, what I did in the first four books
of the River World series was I wrote The Magic Labyrinth, and that presumably
answered the questions about the main mystery throughout the four books. But the
river world, the concept is so big, perhaps for those who aren't familiar with
it, I should say that it concerns the planet in which there's a 10 million mile
long river which follows the valley. And everybody had lived from about 150,000
B.C. to about 1883 AD was resurrected along the banks of the river and
rejuvenated form. It looked like there were 25. And the main mystery behind the
whole thing was why were all these people resurrected?
Who did it and how? And that was answered in the final one. But the thing is
that there are so many themes that I wanted to explore during the course of
those four novels, but I couldn't do it because I would have slowed the story
down too much. It would have taken too many side-tracks, you might say, and I'd
still be working on that particular series. So what I want to do is to write two
more books in which I can extrapolate various themes that I couldn't give any
attention to during the course of the four books. I want to...
Well, let's say, I didn't go into any detail in how you could work out viable
societies with people from every place and every time. I also wanted to bring up
in depth what would happen to famous people on that planet, like what did Karl
Marx think for instance, he could see what had happened to ideas and communism.
Marx and that, okay yeah just start with Karl Marx Okay we're on the air now,
Mr. Farmer. Uh, okay your voice fading away again. Okay it's my fault because I
had the phone away from me, okay let's go now. Uh, well, there's Karl Marx, for
instance, uh, what would he think of what happened to his, uh, ideas about
communism on, on the planet Earth after he died. Uh, Leonardo, Leonardo da
Vinci, uh, his ideas about art, plus the fact that he's on a planet where there
are very few pigments available, for instance, for him to paint. Uh, what would
he do there?
I also wanted to
bring up various figures from science and the military and philosophy and so
forth show what they would do there now, one of the things about the river world
was that although you were born I shouldn't say born although you were
resurrected there in a youthful body of your own as it was in 25 or earlier if
you died before 25 it's like you know you've been doing Buddhism or you know
you've got a plan you need to do it and make a difference in your life. If for
instance you're 83 when your mind is still 83 and you have 83 years of
experience on earth behind
David to progress. What I tried to point out was that some people were
absolutely incapable of progressing. They remained fixed. Others regressed, and
a few progressed. So I wanted to show that theme, too. As a matter of fact,
there would be about 25 or 30 things that I couldn't develop in the four books
of the main series. There was a lot that happened on the two boats to develop
the Society of the two boats. They went up the river. I could have a lot of fun
with that. So I plan on writing two more what I call side stream stories.
Stories take place in the river role but they're not connected with the main
mystery. Just allow me to develop things I couldn't otherwise also I made a lot
of people mad at me because of that last sentence or your paragraph I should say
that I wrote in the magic labyrinth everything seems to been settled everything
has been cleared up and then one of the characters kind of minor one Peter Juris
Friget. He's celebrating with the others in the misty tower when he thinks he
hears a football outside in the hallway. He blows out, comes back and says to
the others, I didn't see anyone, it must have been my imagination. A lot of
readers got mad at me because they thought, oh no, he's going to write another
one. He's leaving a loophole. Well, I am leaving a loophole and I don't know
whether I'll go through it or not. So, but it's quite possible that Magic
Labyrinth wasn't the final one in that series before. That everything that our
protagonist learned and everything that everybody else learned is completely
untrue or half-true. But I haven't decided whether I'll go on with it or not. In
any event, I'm going to write two side-stream stories about the River World.
your mind must be a vast storehouse of these historical characters because in
the river world books you really provide a lot of background about them that
must interest you as well well you see i did research on them of course but on
the other hand i've been doing research all my life because like the majority of
science fiction writers i'm a very voracious reader not just in the field of
science but all fields. And I've always been interested in history and
biography.
So much so that I think that that's what led me into starting genealogical
researches recently in my own family. And I found out and I can prove that I'm
descended from Abraham Lincoln's great-great-grandfather and Daniel Boone's
aunt. That kind of tickled me when I found that out.
That's just one more evidence of my interest in history and biography. I did
give a lot of detail about a lot of historical figures there, but I also once in
a while slipped in very brief mentions of obscure figures in history. I guess it
would take a historian to recognize them right away, but it doesn't matter if
you don't. I just like to play that little game. You've also written a lot about
Tarzan, our Tarzan-like protagonists. And as a matter of fact, Tarzan seems to
be related to a lot of historical figures, too. How did you get interested in
the Tarzan or Tarzan-like characters and then this idea of having them being
related to everybody else from the pulp era and whatnot? not well I
first read Tarsan when I guess I was about seven or eight years old I became
wrapped up in that early age with the works of Edgar Rice Burroughs
and but when I started college I kind of lost interest and didn't read them
anymore but
While I was in Los Angeles, they reprinted the Doc Savage books. Doc Savage was
the Pulp Fiction hero of the early 30s, 40s. When they started reprinting those
books, I started reading them again. And of course, not being young anymore and
having read a great deal, I could see the flaws in them and type of writing, but
they were still a lot of fun.
And I started reading books about Tarzan again, and this time, although I still
kept a lot of my childhood interest in them, a sense of wonder about them, And I
began saying things in Tarzan, for instance, that I have not seen before. It was
not just a creature or an animal, pardon me if I had been edited. It was not
just a child who'd been cast away and raised by great apes and then became a
creature of the jungle, then returned to claim fortune. He was sort of an
archetype of many, many heroes from classical myths. Now, I'm sure that when
Burroughs wrote this, he didn't know what he was doing, but he did it
unconsciously. I think that it's the creation of Tarzan, the stroke of genius.
Burroughs is not a great writer, but he has a great character, just like A.
Conan Doyle is not a great writer. but Gikry is a great character, Sherlock
Holmes. I started delving into the mythology and found many striking
resemblances between Tarzan and the heroes of the ancient Greek myths and the
Sumerian and the Babylonian and so forth. Also, I've always read a lot of
anthropology, a lot of folklore, and there was a great deal of resemblance
between Tarzan and various figures in North American Indian folklore and African
folklore and so forth. And at the same time, I started, well, I never really had
to quit reading Sherlock Holmes, but I found out about the Baker Street Journal,
which publishes, it's quarterly, and it publishes scholarly and pseudo-scholarly
articles. Oh, okay. Great. Then I came across a biography of the Scarlet
Pimpernel. Now, this is the first of biographies about fictional characters
making the assumption that these people really live. Then I came across the
Bering Bould biography from Shaw or Holmes, and a biography of Nero wolf so I
thought well hey great I'll write a biography of Tarzan now the assumption there
is that he really lived and once you make that assumption that he's not a
fictional character then immediately you have to reconcile all the discrepancies
in the novels about Tarzan, you have to investigate his background you you have
to write it as if it were a detailed work of research which by the way it was
And Ted Sturgeon said that I did enough work in my biography of Tarzan to earn
any 12 PhDs or degrees. That's the truth. But I had a lot of fun with it. And
then I started seeing various resemblances between Tarzan and the other
characters. So the first thing you know, I had conceived this idea of what I
call the Wal-Newton family, which is that almost all the great characters are
depicted. A lot of history. were descended from the Scarlet Pimpernel and I drew
up a genealogical man table and then I explained it various appendices and then
when I did my Doc Savage biography I extended it in a logical table proving
Tarzan is related
I had a lot
of fun with it, and apparently the readers did, too. On the other hand, I really
believe Tarzan is alive.
I believe Kilgore Trout is related to some people in the Wal Newton family,
isn't he? Oh yeah, a man of his great genius has to be. He's in the genealogical
chart in the Doc Savage book, I think, the revised version. You seem to identify
a bit with Kilgore Trout. Well the reason for that is because in the first place
I've done a very good job, I was a fan of Sonicas. I liked all his books, but
Kiddowar Trout really turned me on because his early experiences, as a matter of
fact his later ones too, were like a lot of my early experiences and a lot like
the experiences with many other science fiction writers. Back in the old days
when they weren't being paid much, and science fiction was looked down upon, and
we were being taken due to our inexperience with various publishers and agents,
also had a tough time getting any recognition, so I guess that's why I
identified with him, plus the fact he's a great character.
I believe I...
I recall that you were going to write the son of Jimmy Valentine. Wasn't that
Trout's one and only dirty book uh it was just uh not only as one an only
specifically erotic book it was also his only non-science fiction book but uh
bonnigan bonnigan uh i don't know what his reactions are to the novel itself but
uh so many people thought that he'd written it and he would tell you hundreds of
maybe thousands and the reviews came out come said Venus on the half shell by to
work out was the worst thing written another said it was the best thing he'd
ever written so when I applied for permission to write the son of Jimmy
Valentine which I really would have loved to have done for them. I could have
had a lot of fun with it. He said no, which is his prerogacy.
However, that didn't stop me from writing about fictional authors.
In The Venus on the Half Shell, the protagonist, Simon Wagstaff, had his
favorite science fiction an author. Just as in the Vonnegut books, Elliot
Rosewater thought that Kilbert Trout was the greatest living writer in any
field. He should have been president of the U.S. He could have solved all the
problems. Well, anyway, in Venus on the Half Shell, Simon Wagstaff liked to read
the science fiction works of a fellow called Jonathan Swift Somers III. And I
described his various works, or Alvinum. and give the title. But Jonathan Swift
-Somers, who's a fictional author, wrote about a giant German shepherd police
dog whose IQ had been raised to about 200 in a laboratory, and he became a
private detective. Now, I plan eventually someday on writing a book by Ralph von
Vauva, this dog, under the name of Ralph von Vauva. Then maybe I'll end the
cycle by having Ralph von Valvo write about a human named Vonnegut or something
like that, and completing it, going right back to Vonnegut again.
I hope I'm making myself clear. I believe Kilgore Trout has a cousin named Leo
Tincroder that does some writing, too, doesn't he? Yeah Leo Quig-Quig Tincroder.
Well, as a matter of fact, I wrote some stories about and with Tin Froter
figured as a character, and I outlined two of his stories, and then later on, lo
and behold, this story appeared in an anthology by Robert Silverberg, which he
collaborated with me. It's called The Cyrus and Crutches.
See, this could go on and on. I mean, every time you write a story under a nom
de plume that of a fictional author, let's say Kilburg Trout or David
Copperfield these fictional authors can write about their fictional authors and
then you can write stories in which these fictional authors have written
stories. In other words you can go through various stages. Like Vonna Gutt wrote
about Kilburg Trout I wrote a book by Kilgore Trout. Kilgore Trout's book
describes as a science fiction author who had a character in his stories. This
character writes his story and so on and so on.
One of the funny things about this is that I found out that I could use the
fictional author device to break a writing block. I had a writing block once.
that terrible thing that sometimes happens to writers. They don't know what's
caused it. For some reason, they might have many ideas, be eager to go, but when
they sit down in front of a typewriter, nothing happens. Well, that happened to
me once. I never thought it would. I thought I was immune to such a thing, but
it did. And after wrestling for two months and getting no place, I had an idea.
I sat down with the typewriter and wrote a story not by Philip Jose Farmer but
by David Copperfield I don't remember which particular novel story poured
out very good I thought so anyway when I'd completed that the writing block was
gone see I wasn't writing then as a farmer, but as a walker trout. And I was in
his shoes. I had no trouble. Now, the funny thing about this is it's a
psychological trick that I'm conscious of, and yet it works. It's not like I'm
trying to trick my unconscious, but I must be doing one way or another.
I don't know if anybody else has ever broke the riders' block in that manner.
But I recommend trying it. MR. Will you be moving on to the mainstream, as it
was once reported that you might be considering? MR. Well, as I said, when I
started out riding, I wanted to be a mainstream rider. Back in my youthful
foolish days, I had aspirations to be the American Dostoevsky or Melville and
all that sort of stuff.
I'm not confined to science fiction, I have written some stuff that wasn't true
of science fiction, it was mainstream. and i got this idea about two years ago
for writing a mainstream novel which would be called pearl diving in old peoria
and this would take place in peoria all knowing where i live to be in the early
50s which i regard as containing the seed of the movement which later on became
very manifest in the 60s the a shift in the zeitgeist and the attitude of the
time, and in some ways, Peoria, the city where I've lived most of my life, will
be a sort of a protagonist, I'd say. But it's a novel. It's not an
endocumentary. I have great hopes for it. In any event, next year I'm going to
write it. And I told two mainstream stories to Playboy and one to Mystery
Magazine. And back in 1957, I wrote a mainstream novel called Fire on the Ninth
about racial relations in a steel mill, which is obviously based on a steel
mill, which is right outside Peoria, and where I worked for 11 years. Well, yes,
I want to get into mainstream, although I don't intend to quit writing science
fiction.
I have too many ideas for science fiction stories. I have enough to keep me
going if I move to be a hundred. Every day I keep getting new ideas. Jim O'
Where do you see science fiction going? Well, a lot of people ask me that
question, and I think science fiction is growing where it's always been going.
It's going to, I think, become more popular, or at least maintain its
popularity.
There'll be very... In some ways, it will remain the same in that there will be
hardcore science stories, stories extrapolated from scientific principles. There
will be sociological, sexual, psychological, science fiction, and so forth. And
I can't say that it's going any particular direction if you're talking about
change in themes.
Right now, science fiction covers all the themes that are possible.
But the human imagination accepts that we'll be able to develop new variations
and also new concepts out of the old thing. Yes, I hope you're not thinking
about science fiction movies. I'm talking about the literature itself, really.
Right, yeah, that's what we're talking about, too. But the movies have been
taking a new direction. In the Star
Wars phenomenon, for instance,
that's as interested a lot of people in making science fiction movies. For the
first time, really, in this field, in the movie-making field, we're getting some
people who know what science fiction is all about. In the past, with a few
exceptions, we've had producers and directors who thought, well, we'll make a
science fiction movie, And they were basing their idea of science fiction
strictly on what I would call horror literature, monster literature. Well, now I
think there's an indication that we're going to get some very good science
fiction movies which will be based on philosophical, sociological concepts. I'm
not putting Star Wars down because I loved it. I saw it seven times. And really
had a great time. They were familiar with it, and I'm very grateful that Lucas
made it, because Lucas was a person who knew science fiction, who loved it, and
he made a movie which is strictly out of the 30's and 40's pulse, science
fiction pulse. did a magnificent job uh but the success of that is going to
encourage other producers not to imitate him which i think is fatal but to try
some of the hundreds and hundreds of good stories that exist in science fiction
which will be novel uh which will be acceptable by the general audience because
they are getting conditioned now to thinking differently. You'll notice that in
the Star Wars, they never stop to explain things like space war and all that
sort of stuff. They just did it, and they find out it's not necessary to explain
it. There's a certain parallel to science fiction magazine stories when they
first started. When Hugo Grunzebatch had air wonder and science wonder, for
instance, and starred in magazine science fiction. His authors always felt
compelled to stop and explain just what was happening in great detail, thereby
slowing the story down. And it really wasn't necessary anyway. Well, movies, I
think in the future are going to accept this concept. and they're going to take
the position that the movie audience is really more intelligent than they've
given it credit for before and the moviegoers are going to be able to accept
these concepts and therefore we're going to get much better science fiction
movies than they've had in the past also unfortunately we're going to get a lot
more bad ones because there's a lot These are a lot of imitators out there, they
see this thing like Star Wars and think, oh boy, and then they make a bad
imitation. On the other hand, we're going to get some pretty good ones too. At
least that's my idea. Mr. Farmer, I believe that about does it, from IRN. Yeah,
it's been fun for me. We appreciate that. I think it's something like Star Wars.
Thank you.